>>LISA GARR: Hello, and welcome.
I'm Lisa Garr.
So let me ask you question.
Would you like to put
more of your focus
on living a committed life?
Now, what does that mean?
Do issues like sustainability
and poverty and world hunger
seem like things that are
outside of your reach, that
are outside of your grasp?
Would you like to
know how you, how
one person can
make a difference?
Joining me is someone who
really is making a difference.
Global activist and co-founder
of The Pachamama Alliance,
Lynne Twist.
Thank you so much
for being with us.
>>LYNNE TWIST: It's my
pleasure, my delight.
>>LISA: It's our honor, truly.
>>TWIST: Thank you.
>>LISA: So what inspires you to
make a difference in humanity?
Did you just wake
up one day-- I mean,
this has to be the root
of who you really are.
>>TWIST: Well, I think it's
the root of who everybody is.
I don't think I'm
unique in that way.
I think it lives like a burning
yearning for every human being.
And if you just remember
when you were a child
and you found out that
other children were hungry
or you found out
that there was war,
you wanted to do
something about it.
Every little child does unless
they're in those circumstances,
and even then they want
to do something about it.
>>LISA: But people get
disconnected from it
by feeling that it's
out of reach, that it's
too daunting, that they can't do
anything just being one person.
Have you heard that?
>>TWIST: I've heard
that a million times
if I've heard it once.
And I think what stops us is
this kind of very uniquely
human conversation that we
can't make a difference,
that we don't matter, that
our lives are too small.
But when you think
about history,
when you think about
any monumental change
or transformation in history,
it was caused, it was fomented,
it was inspired by a
regular human being
who took an extraordinary stand.
And that's available to
everybody alive today.
And there's so many ways
to live your life in a way
that you're fulfilled
and you know
that your life has meaning.
And it's really from
getting involved
in something that
makes your heart sing
and that's bigger than
your life starring you.
>>LISA: Who are
some of your idols
that really made a difference
in history, that inspired you?
>>TWIST: Well, I
think all of us were
inspired by Mahatma Gandhi.
I've been lucky enough to
live and work in India for,
off and on, for many years.
I never lived
there, but I worked
there are over 18 years
for the Hunger Project.
And Gandhi's legacy is
so huge for everybody
in India but all over the world.
His phrases, "my life is
my message," "be the change
you wish to make in the
world," that's Gandhi.
He was an iconic of
making a difference.
A little individual,
little brown man
who really changed
the course of history.
Martin Luther King, of course.
People who are alive
today like Jane Goodall,
people like Marian Wright
Edelman, Nelson Mandela,
Desmond Tutu, the Nobel
women laureates are--
I'm privileged to
work with the Nobel's.
And I have the great
honor of knowing
Jody Williams and
Rigoberta Menchu Tum.
And I find people who are in
that category of-- we kind of
revere them.
When you actually
get to know them,
it's just like talking to you,
it's just like talking to me.
They're just people
who had the-- they're
ordinary people, really
ordinary people, who
made an extraordinary choice
and extraordinary commitment.
And it generates an
extraordinary life.
>>LISA: So is that
the defining moment?
There's something
that changes a person
from wanting to
make a difference
and actually making
a difference.
Where do you think that fine
line or that changing moment
occurs?
In a person.
>>TWIST: Well, there's-- that's
such a good question and I wish
I could give a formula, but
I don't think there is one.
I think part of
it, I know for me,
was paying attention
to the openings
and pathways that life presents
you to make a difference.
And not turning away from them
or not being afraid of them.
It's in the way we listen to
what the universe brings to us.
It's in the way we
think about who we are
and how we kind of
show up for ourselves.
And I was lucky,
very, very lucky,
to meet some extraordinary
people in my lifetime,
that I was able to see if I
could just be a little bit more
like them.
I ended up being
more like myself.
And so mentors and role models
are really powerful for people.
And especially if they're people
who kind of bring you back
to the power of
your own commitment,
your own life story,
your own capacities,
your own qualities of
love and commitment.
But I think it's a
function of love, frankly.
I think everything's
a function of love.
If you're willing to let
yourself love the world,
love other people,
love being alive,
all kinds of miraculous
things show up in your path
and you have the
opportunity to step into it.
>>LISA: So not seeing
yourself as separate
or as us versus them or as I'm
afraid that that could be me
so I don't want to talk
to that homeless person.
That concept, turning
that into love and--
>>TWIST: Yeah.
>>LISA: --and sharing.
>>TWIST: Yes.
I mean, the word compassion
really means with passion.
So I remember I had
a little experiment
I did for myself when the
homeless issue started
to really enter into
my consciousness.
In a way I was irritated.
I noticed I was irritated
by homeless people.
I was-- I didn't want
them to talk to me.
They were kind of in my way and
they were kind of intrusive.
I did a practice for Lent--
I was raised a Catholic,
I don't really practice
Catholicism any longer--
but Lent came and I kind of
thought, oh, I should do Lent.
Because this wonderful
teacher mine,
Brother David Steindl-Rast,
an Austrian monk,
had just been staying
at my home and we'd
done some work together.
And he took me to
Ash Wednesday mass,
which I hadn't gone to
since I was like two,
and I had this ash
thing on my forehead.
And then he left that day.
And I remember
that day I decided,
I'm going to do Lent this year.
And so for 40 days I did
a whole group of practices
but one of them was that every
homeless person in my path,
I was going to talk to, I was
going to physically touch,
and I was going to contribute
to, not necessarily
financially, but actually have
them feel seen, respected,
and give them a sense
of their own dignity.
And I did it for 40 days.
And I can tell you, if you
ever do something like that,
it changes your life forever
about people you're afraid of,
people you think are
untouchable or unpresentable
or will somehow be
dangerous to you.
I mean, it shifted everything.
So I do think there is practices
we can do that kind of open up
our heart, that close down
that judgemental little voice
in our head.
And when you do something
like that, what happens
is you get transformed.
You start realizing
your own power
and the power of your
capacity to love.
And everything really
good in the world
really comes from
there, I think.
>>LISA: So it changed and
shifted who you were being
and your thoughts around that.
So--
>>TWIST: And that's not
why I did it but I--
>>LISA: Right.
>>TWIST: --ended
up making it-- I
think I made a big difference
with all these people too.
I hope.
>>LISA: Yeah.
I'm sure.
>>TWIST: But certainly
what happened
for me was, I'd call
it a transformation.
>>LISA: So now fast forward to
what I had mentioned earlier.
You are the co-founder of
The Pachamama Alliance.
Which is enormous.
And we're going to talk
a lot about that, but how
did you get to that
place where you
co-founded an entire movement?
>>TWIST: Well--
>>LISA: That's a big step.
>>TWIST: I just want to say,
it wasn't like I woke up one
morning and said, oh,
let's co-found a movement--
>>LISA: Right.
Right.
>>TWIST: --with
my husband, Bill.
It's really very similar
to what I'm describing.
We-- I was very involved
in-- and actually
one of the key
leaders-- of something
called the Hunger Project.
And I was working
all over the world
in India, Bangladesh,
sub-Saharan Africa,
places like Nepal, Sri Lanka,
Ethiopia, Angola, Namibia.
I was responsible for
operations in 47 countries.
I was very, very, very deeply
and profoundly committed
to ending world hunger.
And I was deeply
engaged in doing so.
And I had three
children and I had--
>>LISA: And you were a mom.
>>TWIST: I was a mom and I had
a husband who was in business
and kind of needed me to be
at his side from time to time.
So it was-- already I was
stretched to the absolute max
as most women know.
This is kind of
the way women are
these days,
particularly women who
have professional commitments
or philanthropic commitments
and kids.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>TWIST: So I did not
have one free iota, not
one free psychic minutia
space for anything more.
Yet, at the same time, while
I was really deeply devoted
to my work in sub-Saharan
Africa, India and Bangladesh,
I got a very powerful
invitation to help a friend out
in-- who was running an
organization in Guatemala
with my colleague
John Perkins who
is a very well known
bestselling author
and has also been
trained as a shaman,
was in the Peace
Corps for many years
in Ecuador and the Amazon.
And he and I ended
up in Guatemala
with a whole lot of
things that preceded that,
but we ended up in
a shamanic ceremony
with a great shaman, a really
great shaman, a Mayan shaman.
And in that shamanic ceremony--
it was my first ever,
this was in 1994.
Even though I'd worked with many
people in different cultures,
I'd never been in a
shamanic ceremony before
and I'd never worked in Central
and Latin America or South
America.
And the shamanic ceremony
was in the middle
of the night with a big
fire and we were lying down
in the fire with our
feet towards the fire.
The shaman, with John's help,
was drumming and chanting.
And with John's
help in translation,
asked us to journey.
And I didn't even
know what that was
but I knew it had something
to do with closing your eyes.
So I did and the night
air and the crackling
of the fire and the
shaman's chanting,
his mesmerizing voice, and this
drum beat just transported me.
And I started to feel my arms
turn into gigantic wings.
And it wasn't my imagination;
it was happening.
I didn't open my eyes because
I became completely hypnotized
by this incredible
space we were in.
And my arms turned into
these gigantic wings,
and I felt a large curved
beak grow on my face.
And with sort of a
miraculous next moment,
I was flying over a
vast unending forest
of green in slow motion.
And I was a giant
bird and I could
see all the way through
the top of the trees,
through the canopy
to the forest floor
and see little creatures running
around on the forest floor.
And as I was flying over this
vast unending forest of green
that went forever,
these disembodied faces
of men with orange
geometric face paint
and yellow, red and black
feather crowns on their heads
started floating
up from the forest
floor towards me, the bird.
And they were speaking in
a strange tongue and kind
of calling to this bird, calling
in a kind of plaintiff call
to the bird.
And this is coming at
me-- now, I'm the bird.
And I didn't
understand the voices
or what they were saying.
As they floated back
down into the forest,
these faces with these
geometric face paint.
And this went on for I
have no idea how long.
Kind of like time stopped, it
was endless, I was this bird.
And then I heard a loud, like
a drumbeat, a loud drumbeat.
And I realized, oh,
I'm in Guatemala,
I'm in charge of this
group, I'm a human being.
What am I doing?
>>LISA: Present time.
>>TWIST: And I sat
up and felt my arms.
They were just as they had been.
And my face.
And I looked around
the circle-- and this
is in the middle the night,
now, dark as can be--
and the fire had burned
all the way down.
So I could see the
shaman across the embers.
And all the people
in the circle were
kind of like coming out
of some sort of a trance.
It was really,
really awesome, Lisa.
>>LISA: Powerful.
>>TWIST: It was incredible.
And so each person
shared as best they could
what had happened to them.
And everyone had become some
sort of an animal except
for one person who'd fallen
asleep and dreamt of her
grandchildren,
which is, I thought,
what I was going
to do but I didn't.
And then when it was
my turn, I shared
with the shaman, which
was his request, what
I've just shared with you.
And he looked across at me with
a kind of strange, weird look.
He was kind of strange,
weird looking person anyway.
Kind of strange and the
fire underneath his face.
And then it went all the
way around the circle.
And then it went to
my friend John Perkins
who had spent many, many
years working in the Amazon.
And John had had an-- also had
a vision very similar to mine.
And when the shaman heard
John speak and went back
to what I said, he then
completed the ritual
and asked the two of us to stay
and everybody else departed.
And John, who had
told me, really,
for several years about the
Achuar people in the Ecuadorian
Amazon who he knew
at some point were
going to be calling for contact,
knew that this was the call.
That this was the
time, that we were
being called to meet with
the Achuar people who
had almost no contact
with the outside world
and were ready for contact.
>>LISA: So it came through
you in that moment.
>>TWIST: And John I would say.
And all kinds of different
signs that I could talk about.
>>LISA: Synchronicities--
>>TWIST: Yes.
>>LISA: --that
lined up around it.
>>TWIST: Made it clear
that we needed to go.
>>LISA: That is
a beautiful story
of what a real true
calling is like.
So then everything after
that lined up perfectly
and according to the
vision without your trying.
Right?
>>TWIST: Well, I must
say, I couldn't figure out
how to do that.
I was running this
giant Hunger Project
movement in 47 countries--
>>LISA: Already.
>>TWIST: --and I went directly
from Guatemala to Ghana
to a board meeting with our
Ghanaian board in Ghana.
And we're sitting around
a table in a hotel,
in a hotel meeting room--
three women and five men
and then myself--
all Ghanaian people
with blue black skin,
beautiful people.
And we're having this
wonderful conversation
about the work of the
Hunger Project in Ghana--
we're in Accra, the capital
city-- and the men are talking
and in a flash,
suddenly they started
to have orange geometric face
paint appear on their faces,
on their blue black faces.
>>LISA: From what you saw?
>>TWIST: In Africa.
Yeah.
So I thought, oh, my God, I've
just gone completely nuts.
And nobody was
talking about this.
It would be as if you
had something growing out
of your cheek and we
just kept talking as if--
>>LISA: All of a sudden.
>>TWIST: --it wasn't happening.
And so I got shaken and
I excused myself and went
to the ladies' room, came back,
everybody was still talking,
everything was fine, and
then it happened again.
And then I really burst into
tears, I started shaking.
Everyone asks me what's wrong.
I said, I think
I'm very sick and I
need to go back to
the United States.
And I thought I was sick.
I thought I was hallucinating.
And perhaps I was, who knows.
But I ended up going to the
airport, getting on a plane,
and all the way back
to San Francisco
I saw these same faces.
Whether my eyes
were open or shut.
So by the time I
really returned home
and-- with John Perkins and I--
we realized, we've got to go.
We put together a group
of 12 people, which
is what the Achuar asked for.
People with open hearts,
people with global voice,
people who know
the rainforest is
critical to the
future of life, people
who know that great
wisdom is coming
from the shamans of
today, and people
who knew that indigenous wisdom
is critical for our survival.
And we traveled down
to South America,
to Quito, the
capital of Ecuador,
down the Valley
of the Volcanoes,
over the eastern
side of the Andes,
down the Pastaza River canyon--
if you can picture all this.
>>LISA: We actually
have some video of that.
But what a beautiful
story of a true calling.
But then how you take
action on a calling
and not just deny it and go back
into the cave or the darkness
or routine or whatever
you could do to numb it.
But what it really
means to follow.
And I want to share
with the viewers of what
transpired as a result of that.
We have a clip from the
"Awakening the Dreamer" video,
and it shows a little bit
about what this mission is
so that people can
really understand that.
Let's take a look at that.
>>TWIST: Great.
Perfect.
[BEGIN VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>In 1995, a call issued
forth from the heart
of the natural world that
was heard thousands of miles
away by a small group of
people in the modern world.
In the summer of that
year, in a remote village
in the rainforest, these
two worlds came together.
And the Pachamama
Alliance was born.
>>From the very beginning,
our indigenous partners
told us that it was
really, really great
that we were working with
them in the Amazon shoulder
to shoulder.
But that was only
half the battle.
They told us that
if we really wanted
to protect their
lands permanently,
we would need to go to work
in our part of the world.
And as they put
it, we would need
to change the
dream of the north,
the dream of the modern world.
A dream rooted in
consumption and acquisition,
without any regard
to the consequences
to the natural world
or even our own future.
>>Changing the dream
of the modern world
is certainly a daunting
and some would even
say an impossible task.
But we took the request of
the Achuar very seriously.
Out of our work
with them, we came
to see that we in
the modern world
truly are in some kind
of a trance, living
in a dream that's
threatening to destroy
not only the rainforest
and their way of life,
but the health and well
being of our entire planet.
Our society is on a
completely unsustainable path,
and experts
everywhere are saying
that we have a limited
time to turn things around.
>>So in response
to the request that
came from its
indigenous partners,
the Pachamama Alliance
created this symposium,
Awakening the Dreamer,
Changing the Dream.
Now being offered by
thousands of volunteers
in dozens of countries
around the world.
The purpose of the symposium
is an audacious one,
bringing forth an
environmentally sustainable,
spiritually fulfilling,
socially just human presence
on this planet.
>>The intention is
that, by the end,
rather than seeing these
as three separate issues,
you see them as
interrelated facets of one
profoundly interconnected whole.
And that you not only
understand the scope and urgency
of the planetary
situation we face,
but you also see that the
possibility of our times
is greater than the crisis.
[END VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>LISA: So that entire video
inspired a movement, basically,
that created then a
symposium, a class, that
was done here at Gaiam.
>>TWIST: Yes.
Yes.
Well, as it says in
the video, we really
got the message from
the indigenous people
that the real work--
obviously they
wanted us to stand with them
to protect their forests.
And one of our
great statements is
we're committed to
preserving the world's
tropical rainforest,
but by empowering
the indigenous people who
are its natural custodians.
But also, it's very
clear that what's
putting pressure
on the ecosystems--
particularly the rainforests
but on all ecosystems--
is the dream or trance
of the modern world which
is, it said in the
video, is really
where Pachamama
has gone to work.
And this program, the Awakening
the Dream or Changing the Dream
symposium now has many forms.
One of them is this wonderful
live TV-- television Gaiam
version.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>TWIST: Video.
I guess it's not live.
It was live and now it's video.
>>LISA: But now people have
brought it into their own homes
and--
>>TWIST: Oh, yes.
>>LISA: --created it
all around the world.
>>TWIST: There's thousands
of facilitators delivering
the symposium in 62 countries
in something like 16 languages.
And it's actually a three,
four hour experience live.
It can be an hour and a
half, it can be two days.
There's also a youth version
called Generation Waking Up.
>>LISA: Great.
>>TWIST: And a
children's version.
>>LISA: So it's a whole
curriculum that can be--
>>TWIST: A whole curriculum.
>>LISA: --adopted and
all that can be found
on an Gaiamtv.com--
>>TWIST: Yes
>>LISA: --as well.
>>TWIST: Absolutely.
>>LISA: So then this-- what does
Pachamama, by the way, mean?
What is the name,
Pachamama, mean?
>>TWIST: Well, the word
pachamama, first of all,
is from the Quechua people.
The Quechua people, the largest
indigenous language group
in the world.
And they live in the
Andes and in the Amazon.
And the word pachamama
means mother earth.
Pacha mama.
But to Quechua people, they
would say the earth, the sky,
the universe, and all time.
Because indigenous people
live in a very large cosmology
about reality, much more-- they
see much more than this chair.
They see the spirit of
the chair, et cetera.
So it means the earth, the
sky, the universe and all time.
And so the Pachamama
Alliance is an alliance
between indigenous peoples
of the Amazon and the Andes
and conscious committed people
in the modern world like you
and me.
And I think probably
everybody who's watching this.
>>LISA: And
inspiring, of course,
people on how they can
change and make a difference.
So you talked about that
trance of the modern world.
We've been touching on
that throughout the show
because it-- the further
and further we get away
from the Amazon and
these indigenous people,
and the more that we get
into our modern world
with the modern conveniences and
convenience stores and packaged
foods and all that goes
along with our modern world,
it takes people like
you to bring us back
into that consciousness
and movements
like this to bring us back
into that consciousness.
So, actually there's another
clip that I want people to see,
and this has to do
with what that means.
What it actually means
to reconnect to--
what do you call it?
You called it
unexamined assumptions.
>>TWIST: Yes.
One of the things
that is so beautiful
about indigenous peoples,
and our indigenous partners
in particular, is they
don't make us wrong.
>>LISA: Oh, I like it.
>>TWIST: I love that.
>>LISA: Yeah.
Me, too.
>>TWIST: What they see is
that we're in a trance.
They're not in it, so they
can see that we're in it.
And what they are--
see that their role is
is to help us to wake
up from the trance
before it takes us off a cliff.
And so the trance
is actually made up
of unconscious,
unexamined assumptions.
Kind of a misunderstanding
of our place in the world.
And it's not-- we're
not flawed as a species,
we're really merely mistaken.
We've isolated
ourselves as a species
and we have unconscious
assumptions like, for example,
when you throw something
away, where is away?
There's no such place.
>>LISA: Right.
Where does it really go?
>>TWIST: We've created
an unconscious assumption
that there is an away.
But there isn't.
Even in space now is
cluttered with debris.
So to actually let go of
an unconscious unexamined
assumption like
there is an away,
is a very profound way of
shifting your relationship
with the world around you.
So that's an example.
>>LISA: There's a lot more.
I want actually to see--
want you see this clip again
from "Awakening the Dreamer."
It talks all about
unconscious assumptions.
[BEGIN VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>According to Thomas
Berry, our industrial age
could be characterized
as a period
of technological entrancement
in which our obsession
progress has us marching toward
an ill-defined magical paradise
somewhere in the future.
A future in which we
have mastered the Earth
and everything on it
without any limits.
And so it could be said
that we in the modern world
are living in a kind of trance.
Indigenous people
would call this trance
the dream of the modern world.
This dream could also be
called our current worldview,
a way of seeing the world we're
not even aware that we have.
A worldview is held
in place by a set
of beliefs and
unexamined assumptions
that we're completely
unaware of.
Like glasses we've worn
so long we don't even
know we're looking
through them anymore.
People's actions correlate
with their worldview.
We take actions consistent
with how we see the world.
And often those actions
produce outcomes
we didn't predict or intend.
So when our actions produce
outcomes we're not intending,
it's important to identify
the unconscious unexamined
assumptions that generated those
actions in the first place.
>>All the crises
we're facing today
can be seen as the
unintended result
of the unexamined
assumptions that
permeate the modern industrial
society and our own thinking.
[END VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>LISA: So as we can see,
it's all about awareness,
it's all about
decisions that we make,
starting somewhere.
I love the idea of not making
us wrong because there's
social means and conveniences
that have gotten us
into one place or another.
So what types of things
do you do in your life?
>>TWIST: Well, one of the things
that was a big wake up for me--
I'll just say it
honest and true,
to be transparent-- I used to
probably use three, four, five,
six water bottles a day--
plastic water bottles-- I mean,
really sort of unconsciously.
And I was totally
into drinking water
and it was all about my health--
>>LISA: Good for you.
Right.
>>TWIST: --not drinking water
from the tap and all that.
And this is some time ago now.
I've totally let go of this.
But when I took--
when we started
developing the symposium, and
we actually did the research
and found out that
in the United States
alone we discard 600 million
water bottles every single day.
>>LISA: Day.
Wow.
>>TWIST: That just blew my mind.
And I learned about this
island out in the middle
of the ocean of plastic
bottles that's bigger than--
>>LISA: The garbage patch.
>>TWIST: --Texas.
I was so shocked by that.
>>LISA: And there's
three of them.
>>And then I looked
back at my own behavior
to see, what am I
doing that's actually
fostering that, fomenting
that, kind of adding to that?
>>LISA: Right.
>>TWIST: And so I almost
never, if I can help it--
and every once in
a while you have
to-- take a plastic
bottle of any kind.
Because I think
about that island,
I think about that
600 million, and I
think about the fact
that just me in one
week, if I did five
water bottles a day
times seven, that's a lot of
water bottles from just one
person.
>>LISA: What you were
personally contributing.
>>TWIST: And I'm running
conferences with water bottles.
And so I-- that's so simple
and most people know that now,
but some people don't.
And when you find
that out-- and I
was in a meeting in New
York-- I'll never forget it--
and there was this really
cool guy from Germany.
I wish I could remember
his last name because he
was-- made such
difference to me.
His name is Siggy.
And we were-- it was
at the Tibet House
and we were having lunch.
And I was doing some
consulting because I
do fundraising consulting and
organizational development
consulting sometimes.
And it was time
for lunch and they
brought in all this
wonderful food.
And Siggy would not allow
anyone to take a water bottle.
He said, I want to just
announce that anybody here
who doesn't know, we
should not be drinking out
of water bottles.
And please take those away and
bring us a pitcher of water
and put it in a glass.
And I remember-- it was so
brave of him to do that.
But then he explained.
And everybody from then on
from that little gathering
actually had a more
conscious relationship
with plastic bottles.
Now, maybe they don't all never
take another plastic bottle,
but every one of us can
do something like that
without making anyone wrong.
But just awaken.
Did you know?
>>LISA: Right.
Right.
>>TWIST: And then things
like, for the environment,
we all know that it's really
better to buy local food
if you can.
Now, you can't always do that,
but if you're eating something
that comes all the way from
France or an Evian bottle,
you could say, or let's
just say something
that gets imported from
Australia or New Zealand,
perhaps a kiwi,
when you could buy
one that was grown 100
miles away or 50 miles away.
>>LISA: Right.
>>TWIST: You think about how
much petroleum and air travel
and packaging and-- it takes to
get that little kiwi from New
Zealand to your table
in San Francisco,
and you start
thinking, well, I don't
think I want to do that anymore.
I'll just look in
my store, where's
the locally grown food--
>>LISA: Just to be aware of it.
>>TWIST: --and if they don't
have it I'll mention that
to the grocer and then I'll--
I'll say I'm going to go
to Whole Foods until you have
that section because I know
they do that.
Or I'll go to this
grocery store.
>>LISA: I saw this.
I thought about how far
away we have gotten.
And I saw this
billboard on the way
to dropping my
daughter off to school
and it was a governmental,
I think, health agency.
And it said something
about-- it was
this little child
eating watermelon.
And it said, tell them
it's astronaut food.
Whatever works.
And I thought, how
far away have we
gotten that we need to tell
kids that eating a watermelon
is astronaut food?
Why can't we just tell
them it's a watermelon?
Why did we have to say
that as a campaign?
That we've gotten so conditioned
by the plastics and the foods
and so forth.
But it's all about
the awareness.
The billboard was
just shocking to me
that that's now a
marketing campaign.
But it's about getting back
to-- so when you go back
to the Amazon, when you go
back to the indigenous people
there-- and you go
back often, don't you?
>>TWIST: Yes, I do.
And I take people there, too.
>>LISA: And you
take people there.
>>TWIST: I'll take
you if you want to go.
>>LISA: Oh, my God.
That's an honor to go with you.
So do you bring this
experience back to the people
there and say, well,
this is what we've done?
Is it making an impact,
is really my question?
>>TWIST: Well, yes, is the
answer to that question.
Then I need to embellish because
when people go on a Pachamama
Alliance journey, or go to the
Amazon with us, in particular,
and go to this very remote area,
what you really get from that
is you get in touch
with something
that I don't know you can
get in touch with it--
maybe there are other
ways-- but you actually
have a relationship
with plants and animals
like they're your kin.
Because the indigenous
people, they
see the giant otter
as their brother
and the harpy eagle
as their uncle,
and they see the ayahuasca
plant or the medicinal plants
or the teaching plants or the
food plants as their relations.
And they don't live in the
forest off all this stuff.
They are of the forest and they
live in the community of life
with all their kin.
And I'm not saying that you
and I are going to probably
do that a lot this lifetime.
But it changes your very
way of seeing the world.
And plus, they have a
real dignity and respect
with their ancestors and
with all future generations.
So you start to realize, oh, I'm
the current blossom on the tree
of life from the
lineage that I come from
and I'm passing it onto your
daughter or my children,
and to do the best job I
can with this period of life
that I've been given to live.
You start thinking of yourself
beyond your own lifetime.
And really, almost
everybody does that.
And that changes everything.
I can't tell you.
>>LISA: You're a part of
a much, much bigger whole.
>>TWIST: A bigger story.
And instead of what's
right in front of you,
all these little petty
worries, they start to diminish
and they don't have you.
They don't grip
you like they did.
So it's really healthy
for your own consciousness
and your own peace of mind.
>>LISA: Tell me a little bit
more about the ayahuasca plant.
You had mentioned
that it had-- it's
meaning to the indigenous people
and what your experience is.
If you could share with us
a little bit about that.
I've heard a lot about it.
>>TWIST: Well,
ayahuasca is-- or natem,
is how the Achuar which
is the primary indigenous
group we work with.
We work with all the
indigenous groups,
but that's the
word that they use.
Is a teaching plant.
And its their most sacred,
most revered teacher.
And it's not a drug, it's
not done in a laboratory,
it's not a bunch of chemicals.
It's actually a plant.
And the shamans prepare
it with great reverence.
It's-
>>LISA: It's ceremonial.
>>TWIST: Yes.
It's a ceremonial experience.
And then they are
the people who you
work with when you
ingest the kind of brew
that they make out of the plant.
And I can tell you
this will never
become a recreational activity
because it makes you very sick.
It makes you purge.
We would, in our culture,
we would say vomit.
But they call it
purging, cleansing
your body of all the
ills, of the toxins.
And not the toxins
only that come
from our food but
the toxins that
come from the newspaper, that
come from television, that
come from our doubts
about ourselves.
And you actually
do-- most people--
purge quite dramatically.
>>LISA: Extensively.
>>TWIST: Yeah.
And it's not what
I would call fun.
And sometimes it goes
the other way also.
And not every single
person, but it's
almost like that's
part of what makes
it so humbling to
interact with the plant.
Because the plant,
then-- they call
her a mother-- she
does come to you.
And she-- you see
things, you can
see the-- it depends
on the person,
it's very, very
personal-- but sometimes
you can see the
veins and the blood
running through your
own hand or your body.
You can see inside
of a leaf, you
see patterns in the sky that
you didn't know were there,
you actually have
visions of animals
that you don't even
know what they are.
You'll see anacondas,
you might see jaguars,
you'll sometimes see
the face of a shaman.
It sounds very trippy
and dramatic, and it is,
but I just want to talk about
it with a real reverence.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>TWIST: Because for
indigenous people
and doing it in the
rainforest with them--
which is a tremendous honor.
They've been doing this
for thousands of years
and this is where
they receive all
of their prophetic information,
all of their profound wisdom.
And these people,
although we would
call them primitive
in the way they live,
are highly, highly
sophisticated in ways
that we are quite primitive.
>>LISA: So they guide you
through the experience.
>>TWIST: Yes.
>>LISA: And that's the way
that really should be done.
>>TWIST: Well, I can't
say should really.
I kind of try to avoid
that word when possible.
But I invite people to consider
the possibility, let's say,
that this is the most authentic
encounter with that teaching
plant.
And it's a central part of
the culture, of the teachings,
for many of the
indigenous tribes.
And we have received tremendous
benefit ourself from them.
And we realize that much of
it has come from the plant.
>>LISA: So it allows
you to see the earth
as the mother would
see the earth?
>>TWIST: Yes.
>>LISA: In a way.
>>TWIST: You actually-- yes.
Yes.
And I'll just say, she is who's
speaking through that plant.
So you have a
direct relationship
with the being,
the Gaia-- here we
are at Gaiam-- the
actual Gaia spirit.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>TWIST: She and you become in
a kind of collaborative oneness.
>>LISA: I have heard that
is a life changing journey.
That you don't ever
go back once you
have that experience of
what you gain-- not gain,
but what you
experience and what you
learn changes who
you are for life.
>>TWIST: Well, it
changes-- yes, it does.
It almost reveals who you
are rather than changes it.
>>LISA: Interesting.
>>TWIST: So I think the
real verb to use is reveals.
It unconceals who
you are to yourself.
And you start to realize
that you are an ecosystem.
I mean, I never thought
of myself as an ecosystem
until I had an experience
with the plant ayahuasca.
And now I know I
am an ecosystem.
It's not that I live
in an ecosystem,
and you take care of
all this stuff out here.
Yes, I am an ecosystem, I
am part of the ecosystem.
>>LISA: In what way?
>>TWIST: Well, I'm
a biological being.
I'm a spirit in biological form.
I take from the ecological
resources around me
and I give back to them.
And that puts you in right
relation with the communion
and the community of life.
Rather than being what Thomas
Berry, the great cosmologist,
calls our species.
He says that we've been
in species isolation
and that we're so isolated from
other species we don't even
realize we're part of the
community of life, we're here,
we think, to exploit and
use the community of life
for our own gain.
And that has us in a
real fix as a species.
We may not be forever
welcome on this planet
if we don't cut that out.
>>LISA: Right.
>>TWIST: So the Earth's
going to be fine,
but are we going
to be allowed to--
>>LISA: On it.
>>TWIST: --stay.
So I don't mean
to make us wrong.
That was-- indigenous
people would never do that.
But we've kind of lost our
relations and our relationship
with the very thing that
supports life and supports us.
And we're kind of
destroying our own nest.
And none of us want to do that.
There is nobody--
>>LISA: Right.
>>TWIST: --who's
doing it on purpose.
>>LISA: Intentionally.
Right.
>>TWIST: It's all based
in unconscious, unexamined
assumptions that we
don't even realize
we are doing damage with.
Just like I didn't
realize I was building
an island in the Pacific Ocean--
>>LISA: Right.
>>TWIST: --with
my water bottles.
>>LISA: Oh, yes.
And there's so much around that.
And I really encourage people
to look that up online,
to look at-- research
garbage patch and you'll see
there's three the
size of Te-- I mean,
they're-- it's a problem that
every single human being is
contributing to and can--
>>TWIST: And--
>>LISA: --solve.
>>TWIST: --unconciously.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>TWIST: Unconciously.
But when you wake up--
>>LISA: Can solve.
>>TWIST: --you
just wouldn't think
about continuing to do that.
>>LISA: Right.
>>TWIST: So that's why
a program like this
and what Gaiam's doing and
that Gaiam TV is so important
because I say that
when people know,
when they're conscious,
when they wake up,
and if you also can provide
some pathways for action-- which
is what you're asking me
to do and what the getting
into action workshop which is
also part of Pachamama does
and what Bioneers does and what
many of the guests on your show
do-- any action.
It's kind of like,
get an action.
Whatever it is.
>>LISA: Yes.
And we actually
have another clip
that I want to play in just a
second about the story of stuff
and how it gets
from one place to--
and the consciousness around it.
But I just wanted to
ask you really quickly
about the ayahuasca experience.
Is that where you
had the invitation
to create The
Pachamama Alliance?
Was that--
>>TWIST: Well--
>>LISA: --around that story?
Was that different?
>>TWIST: I have to say, yes.
I mean, we don't always
say that so publicly,
and here we are on television.
But it's true, yes, that
experience for Bill and I,
when we--
>>LISA: And John.
>>TWIST: --when I described
we went that very first time--
and John Perkins who'd
participated with ayahuasca
for--
>>LISA: Many years.
>>TWIST: --many years.
That night was a turning
point in our lives.
We didn't know it at the
time, but we look back now
and we can really see
there was something there.
Because we didn't have
the time or the energy
or the space to
start an organization
that's become a global movement.
We weren't even
thinking about that.
We didn't speak Spanish, we'd
never been to South America,
we weren't even thinking
about the environment.
We were totally clueless.
We were like a blank canvas.
>>LISA: Wow.
Wow.
>>TWIST: But that trip and that
encounter with the indigenous
people and--
>>LISA: And the journey.
>>TWIST: --the encounter with
the shaman with that plant
really was-- it was
all part of it--
but that night, I
can say very clearly,
was seminal, was
potent, really is
an experience I'll never forget.
Let's put it that way.
>>LISA: And I
appreciate you saying
that because you solved a lot
of the mysteries in my mind
around the plant and
you gave it reverence
that it really does deserve.
And you had to be the one that,
along with Bill and with John,
to continue on the dream.
You had to bring it into
reality and bring it to us
and create the
symposium and all that
had to happen because
of your actions.
And so, I mean,
this whole concept
and what you empower us with
is your story and your journey
of how you took a vision
and turned it into reality
and have impacted, not only
us, created a whole movement,
creating sustainability
on this planet.
I mean, it's really
an incredible story
and that's why I so
appreciate you being here
and that's why I'm so
honored to sit with you.
Especially as a female, I
just really appreciate that.
It's really nice.
It really just is.
And who you represent and
all that is wonderful.
>>TWIST: Well, the
ayahuasca is a woman.
>>LISA: Oh, it's a female plant.
>>TWIST: It's a female plant.
>>LISA: It's a mother plant.
>>TWIST: They refer
to her as a mother.
They say has she come.
You know, because you're
waiting for the visions.
And--
>>LISA: Interesting.
>>TWIST: --so anyway
there's a lot of--
>>LISA: That's great.
>>TWIST: --wisdom that comes
from that feminine energy
through the rainforest,
through the earth
and through that plant.
>>LISA: And that wisdom
was also inspired
in the "Awakening
the Dreamer" video.
So we have another clip on that
that shows the story of stuff
and how we can really
become aware and conscious
on the inception of a radio,
a simple little radio.
Let's show that clip.
[START VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>I was walking to work and I
wanted to listen to the news.
I found this cute little
green radio for $4.99.
I was standing there in
line to buy this thing
and I was thinking, how
could $4.99 possibly capture
the costs of making this radio
and getting it into my hands?
The metal was probably
mined in South Africa,
the petroleum was
probably drilled in Iraq,
the plastics were probably
produced in China,
and maybe the whole thing
was assembled in Mexico.
$4.99 wouldn't even pay the
rent for the shelf space
it occupied until I came
along, let alone part
of the staff guy's salary
who helped me pick it out
or the multiple ocean
cruises and truck
rides pieces of
this radio went on.
That's how I realized I
didn't pay for the radio.
So who did pay?
Well, these people paid with the
loss of their natural resource
space.
These people paid with the
loss of their clean air,
with increasing asthma
and cancer rates.
All along this system,
people pitched in
so I could get this
radio for $4.99.
[END VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>LISA: I love that
because it really
made it in a very simple
term-- the beginning, middle,
and end-- of where things go.
And it makes you think
more consciously when
you're in a place,
being a consumer.
>>TWIST: Yeah.
I must say, that
is a 20 minute film
called "The Story of Stuff"--
>>LISA: Oh, wow.
>>TWIST: --by an incredible
activist named Annie Leonard.
And all of her things are
great. "Story of Stuff"
has won all kinds of awards.
But I recommend people go
look at the whole thing
because you'll see, really,
the story of our stuff.
And we just don't
think about it.
And when you find out about
it, when you learn about it,
then you start being
much more discerning.
And it enriches your life.
You give up nothing.
The main thing I want
to say is that people
get afraid they're
going to have to give up
the things they love.
They don't.
They'll end up loving the
things they have way more.
I remember-- there's a
great quote from Aristotle.
He said, I love to
go to the market
to see all the
things I don't need.
And it's kind of like,
you start to realize, God,
I've got everything
I need and I'm
going to do a
better job with it.
And it makes your life
richer rather than poorer.
>>LISA: And the
indigenous people
don't have that attachment
to stuff, and even money.
>>TWIST: And it makes their
life much richer, frankly,
much more meaningful,
less cluttered,
and their mind clear.
And so I just want
people to know
they don't do give
almost anything up.
It's what they'll gain is really
what the power of all this is.
>>LISA: So it declutters
and uncomplicates things.
>>TWIST: Yeah.
You know how good you
feel when you clear out
your closet, for example,
or clean out a drawer?
It's like doing that
with the way you live.
And if we can do
that as a society,
I can't tell you how
great it's going to be.
>>LISA: It also
helps to declutter
your mind and your
attachment to things.
>>TWIST: Yes.
And all our doubts
about ourselves--
>>LISA: All that stuff.
>>TWIST: --all that chatter.
>>LISA: Absolutely.
All right.
We're going to
take a quick break.
When we come back, we're
going to talk about some
of the prophecies that the
indigenous cultures have
taught you.
And you could share that
with around this culmination
of this 2012 date and
some of the journeys
that you've been on.
>>TWIST: Great.
>>LISA: All right.
We'll be right back.
>>TWIST: Thank you.
>>LISA: Welcome back.
I'm Lisa Garr and I'm
joined by Lynne Twist who
is a true global activist and
an inspiration to many of us.
So we were talking about
the indigenous cultures
that you visited.
And what is their perspective
around this coming of the 2012,
the end of time, the
beginning of a new cycle?
Can you share with us
some of the prophecies
that you've heard?
>>TWIST: Well, one
of the prophecies
that I'm most
familiar with-- now,
everybody knows that the Mayan
prophecy or the Mayan calendar
ends in 2012.
And that's a very,
very significant thing
for the Mayan people,
obviously, and also
indigenous people around the
world are pretty aware of that.
And so if you think
about the Mayans,
they've been kind of waiting
for 2012 for 2,000 years
or thousands of years.
>>LISA: Right.
>>TWIST: So it's something
to pay attention to
even if you don't buy it.
The prophecy I'm
most familiar with
is the prophecy of the
eagle and the condor.
And the indigenous peoples
of the Amazon and the Andes
have been telling
it for millennia.
I mean, really,
thousands of years
about this time in history.
And it comes to fruition
right about now.
And 2012 is an important
milestone in that prophecy.
And that prophecy says that
at this time in history
the eagle people, who are
the people who perceive life
primarily through the mind--
that's people like us--
will have reached a zenith in
their capacity to use the mind.
In fact, they will have
even invented tools
to extend the
capacity of the mind.
That's probably the computer
and the smartphones and--
>>LISA: Technology age.
>>TWIST: --and all
that stuff we've got.
And they will be
material rich beyond
any previous
generation's imagination,
but they will be spiritually
impoverished to their peril
and their very survival
will be at risk.
While the condor people,
and the condor people
refers to the indigenous
peoples of the planet,
people who live primarily
through the wisdom of the heart
and perceive life
through the five senses.
Those-- and are very conversant
with the spirit world.
The condor people will be
at an incredible zenith
in their capacity to
intuitive skills and instinct
and understanding their
kin in the natural world
and the natural world
cycles and the spirit world.
Yet, they will be
materially impoverished
to their peril in any
encounter with the eagle world
and their very survival
will be a risk.
>>LISA: So there's a
shadow to each side.
>>TWIST: Yes.
And both sides will
be at their zenith.
And that in this last
500 year period, which is
called a Pachacuti,
which was called
the Pachacuti of
dominance and darkness
which began right around 1492.
That sounds familiar.
500 years of dominance and
darkness by the eagle people.
The condor people
and the eagle people
and the beginning of
this next 500 year cycle,
which is called the
tenth Pachacutec,
is the Pachacutec of
balance and light.
And this is when the
eagle and the condor
will remember that
they are each other
and reunite, remember,
and fly together
in the same skies, wing to
wing, and the whole world
will come back into
balance for 500 years.
That's the prophecy
for this time.
And they say that
the 25 years where
we move from one Pachacutec,
one 500 year cycle,
to the next 500
year cycle, there
will be a humbling of all
the creatures of the Earth
by Pachamama herself.
That is tsunamis, earthquakes,
volcanic eruptions,
tidal waves, unexpected
climate changes.
They've been prophesying this
really for thousands of years.
And that's Pachamama
humbling her creatures
so they will find their rightful
relationship with her as we
go into the Pachacutec
of balance and light
and the eagle and the condor
fly together in the same sky.
>>LISA: That resonates so much.
>>TWIST: I love that prophecy.
>>LISA: So much.
>>TWIST: It's so positive.
>>LISA: But it's not
just that culture.
It's many different
cultures that
have had similar
types of prophecies.
The White Buffalo.
>>TWIST: The White
Buffalo prophecy
is coming to fruition
from the native people
of the Americas,
the North Americans.
The Hopi prophecy,
we are the ones
we've been waiting for
which is quoted so often
is coming to fruition 2012.
The eagle and the condor
prophecy, the Mayan prophecy,
and I've learned
from Terence McKenna,
the great ethnobotanist who's no
longer living, but in a session
we had with him, that
the "I Ching" even
has a prophecy about 2012.
And that prophecy says
we're ending thousands
of years of a culture
of habit and we
move into a culture
of novelty, is the way
that-- that the "I
Ching" talks about it.
So all of these prophecies
coming to fruition
at the same time
makes 2012, I think,
a year of beauty, magic, and
transformation for all of us.
Even if you don't buy any
of that stuff, or if you do,
thousands and
thousands of years ago,
people were talking about 2012.
And that's something
to pay attention to.
>>LISA: It's a very
significant time in history.
And it's not the
Hollywood end of times
that we see the movies about.
This is something that
has been prophesied
by many different cultures.
I look at it is
something where it
is what you believe
it to be as well.
You can make it as positive
as you want it to be.
You could make it
a time for growth.
I've heard different
astrological forecasts
of planetary alignments
and so forth.
I mean, it's whatever
your belief system is.
But it also can relate to
what you put into the future.
I've heard that the seeds
planted in 2011 grow in 2012.
It's all these different things.
But you catch what
you want to hear--
>>TWIST: Right.
>>LISA: --and as long as
it serves you and humanity,
it's fine with me.
>>TWIST: Yeah.
I agree with that.
And many people-- like
Barbara Marx Hubbard
is orchestrating this
whole birthday 2012.
>>LISA: Right.
>>TWIST: The Mayan prophecy
calendar ends on December 21,
and December 22 she's
calling the birthday.
>>LISA: That's great.
>>TWIST: And I would
say that it's a time--
and really speaking of people
making a difference with
their life and getting
on some sort of a path--
>>LISA: Getting into
action about it.
>>TWIST: Getting into action.
One way of looking at
our time in history
is that we are
alive at a time when
we can hospice the death of
the old structures, cultures
and systems that really
no longer serve us.
And we can hospice their death.
We don't need to kill them.
>>LISA: That are breaking
down all around us.
>>TWIST: Yeah.
Because they are dying.
If they're
unsustainable that means
they can't last so
they are falling apart.
And if we hospice
their natural death,
they'll die faster
and more gracefully.
While we midwife the birth of
the new structures and systems
that are appropriate,
that are awakened,
that are appropriate
to a long term
future for the human family.
>>LISA: So the breaking
down of old systems
has basically been
prophesied and that's
kind of what we're
experiencing, what we're seeing.
>>TWIST: Yes.
You could say that this comes
from the great ecologist
and businessman and speaker
and just a hero for me,
Paul Hawken.
He says that our species'
immune system is kicking him.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>TWIST: And I just love that.
And you can see the
Occupy Movements
now-- it's in 50 cities and it's
in 67 countries or maybe more
now.
And it's like an immune system--
>>LISA: Yeah, if you
look at it on a map.
>>TWIST: --really designed to
heal environmental degradation,
political corruption,
the kinds of things
that come from ideologies that
we've sort of gotten addicted
to that no longer
make a difference
and are actually inappropriate
and dishonest now.
For a world that
knows that it needs
to really transform and change.
>>LISA: I've noticed that
on a personal level as well.
On my radio show, people
are calling in talking about
relationships breaking down,
old jobs breaking down,
even family systems breaking
down that really were
in the old paradigm and no
longer able to be sustained now
because the energy has shifted,
the consciousness has shifted,
it has reached a point of
critical mass where those
systems cannot exist any longer
because who we are being has
shifted so much.
>>TWIST: Right.
And they're not bad.
They were of service,
but they're not relevant
any longer.
>>LISA: Any longer.
>>TWIST: So it's really like--
I like to actually even put
the financial turn
down, downturn--
turn down, that's
what you do to a bed.
No.
Downturn or what's often
called the financial crisis
in that context as well.
Because I see it-- and I
do a lot of work with money
as you know as a fundraiser and
a philanthropist and someone
who works with
money, and I know we
want to talk about that
too-- as a huge purification.
This financial quote unquote
crisis that began in 2007, 2008
is such a blessing.
Now, it's painful.
Oh, my God, it's painful.
People have lost their
homes and their retirement
and all kinds of--
>>LISA: How are you
calling it a blessing?
>>TWIST: Because we as
a-- if you look long view,
not short view-- we really
need to wake up about money.
We need to really have almost
like a shamanic shape shift
purification about money.
We need to come to
terms with the way
that we've gotten
caught and lost
in our relationship with money.
And money is really
just a symbol
in many ways of the lost
soul of our species.
But we've really gotten caught
in our relationship with money.
And so the financial
crisis, you could
call it a cleansing, a
purification, an opportunity
to reboot, to
rethink, to resource,
reinvent our relationship with
ourselves, the natural world,
each other and put
money in its place
rather than right here in
front of every human being
and being the only thing
they care about and the thing
they eclipse everything else
in order to get their hands on.
>>LISA: So what is the new
relationship with money?
What does that look like?
>>TWIST: Well, in this book,
which is sitting right here.
>>LISA: "The Soul of Money."
>>TWIST: "The Soul of Money."
Which I wrote.
And I wrote it-- I wrote
it a long time ago.
Actually, it seems like a long
time ago, it came out in 2004--
the end of 2003, 2004.
But it's more
relevant now than ever
because in that conversation
I really examine
what I call the lie of scarcity
or the condition of scarcity.
Which is really haunts
the human family.
A belief, an unconscious,
unexamined assumption--
and just to go back
to that-- we have
unconscious, unexamined
assumptions about money that
are literally
choking us to death.
And first of all, we
forget that we invented it.
We made money up.
It's our creation, it
doesn't grow on trees,
pennies do not rain from heaven.
We invented money, only
about 3,500, 4,500 years ago.
>>LISA: As a means of--
>>TWIST: And for the purpose of
facilitating sharing with one
other--
>>LISA: Trade.
>>TWIST: --our
goods and services.
And that purpose for money
has-- we've lost sight of that.
We now exchange
goods and services
so that we can have money
rather than use money
to facilitate the equanimity,
the goods and service exchange
from human beings
to one another.
>>LISA: And once again,
become detached from it
with the plastic and the paper.
>>TWIST: Yeah.
Oh, my God.
It's insane.
>>LISA: It's numbers now.
>>TWIST: And we
used to be citizens
and now we're not
even called citizens.
We're called consumers.
And if you look that
up in the dictionary,
it's the most unattractive
word for a human being.
It means he or she who
takes, depletes, diminishes,
or destroys.
>>LISA: Consumer?
>>TWIST: That's what
the word consumer means.
That's what we're called now.
We named ourselves that.
And the word citizen,
on the other hand,
means he or she who
stands for the well being
of the community, the state,
the nation or the world.
And you know, I'm all about
restoring our citizenship
and realizing that it's
not that we don't need
to buy food and clothing
and take care of ourselves,
but there is a kind of
mindset of never enough,
we've got to have
more, that there's not
enough to go around, you've got
to get yours before somebody
else gets it, that more
is better no matter what,
more shoes, more sweaters,
more market share, more houses,
more square feet in your
house, more magazines,
more everything.
And that that's just
the way that it is
and that's the kind of
world we're living in.
When in fact, if you
really look at that
as an unconscious,
unexamined assumption,
almost like an
obsession and addiction,
and you suspend it or bracket
it, if you will, for just--
>>LISA: A moment.
>>TWIST: --even for
a moment and take
a look at what
you actually have.
The beauty of your friendships,
all the people that
love you, the incredible gift of
health and well being, the fact
that you are fed, that you
are taken care of, that you
actually really do
have what you need.
Now, maybe you want more of this
or more of that, but we're OK.
And there is a
wonderful-- there's
so many things to
say about this--
but there's a wonderful
teacher that I love so much,
Brother David Steindl-Rast,
who's one of my great teachers.
He's in his 80s now
and I was really
so blessed teach
with him many times.
And he says we're not
grateful because we're happy,
we're happy because
we're grateful.
And he lives in a state
of absolute constant
gratefulness--
>>LISA: Gratitude.
>>TWIST: --which he
calls great fullness.
>>LISA: Oh.
>>TWIST: The great
fullness of life.
So I-- there's such
a rich treasure trove
of a conversation about
sufficiency or enough
that I love to engage
with with people.
>>LISA: But we are, though,
still in an economy.
The economy does make
this world go round,
it is a system that we
are currently a part of.
Maybe not so much the
indigenous cultures,
maybe they are still
in a place of being
able to trade and have
that type of associations.
But we are in this economy.
So how do you bridge that gap?
How do you narrow it?
>>TWIST: Well, it's
really challenging.
You're absolutely right.
We're in a system, a money
system, an economic system--
>>LISA: That isn't
working so well.
>>TWIST: --that isn't
>>LISA: According to some.
>>TWIST: That's not based
on any real value, that
generates a constant
demand for more.
In fact, even money
comes into existence
with interest attached.
The Federal Reserve
is a private bank,
it's not part of the government.
Most people don't know that.
And when money is issued, it's
issued with interest attached,
it needs to be paid back.
So there's always less money in
circulation than there is owed.
So money itself, in the system
of money, generates debt.
That actually is the
money system that we have.
And the money system
itself creates
an imperative for growth because
the only way you can pay back
the interest-- which is more
money than is in circulation--
is by growing the economy.
And that means we have to
commodify more and more
and more of the natural world.
We need to consume it in order
to create a growing economy.
And that is a runaway
unconscious, unexamined
assumption that now
is being questioned
by some of the very most premier
economists on this planet.
Also, the money system itself
is being questioned in a way
that it never has been before.
So that's the blessing, I
say, of the financial crisis.
>>LISA: But how does that
tie into making a difference
and to the fundraising
that you talk about?
Because you really have a
wonderful different slant
on fundraising.
When you have a mission
or a passion or something
that you want to do
to really help people
or to make a difference
in the world,
but you don't necessarily
have the means to be
able to make that difference
because it requires finances.
Yet, you can get those
finances because we
are in an economic system.
How do you bridge
all of that together?
>>TWIST: Well, wow.
That's a wonderful big question.
>>LISA: Yeah.
It's a big one.
>>TWIST: If I'm
not careful, I'll
push B7 and start my whole
workshop with you here.
But I actually have
learned almost everything
I know about money
from raising money.
I've raised hundreds
and hundreds of millions
of dollars, I've trained
somewhere in the neighborhood
of 50,000 fundraisers
in something
like 50, 60 countries.
I've trained people in Ethiopia
to raise money from each other.
One of the poorest
countries in the world.
Or Bangladesh or
even Mozambique.
And I have learned
that if really you
see fundraising in
a different light.
So it's so hard to give you
enough of a download about this
without doing the whole
workshop, but I'll say that--
or reading the whole book-- I'll
say that I learned a lot of it
in the Hunger Project.
And the Hunger
Project is dedicated
to really eradicating
world hunger.
Eradicating it.
And so we obviously needed to
raise a little money to even--
>>LISA: That's a big--
>>TWIST: --do that kind of work.
>>LISA: --project.
Yeah.
>>TWIST: And from
the very outset,
we saw that many
organizations were
using the pornography of
poverty to make people feel
guilty and bad so that they
would dig into their pocket
and give money.
And then you need to
have the hungry people
to keep your organization going.
So it actually is
a self-defeating--
>>LISA: Wow.
>>TWIST: --system.
It also is undignified.
It doesn't really
raise up who they are.
And so I've really, really--
I'm kind of a poster girl
for that-- we used to say
in the Hunger Project,
there's not a billion
mouths to feed.
There's a billion
people standing
on the front lines of
ending world hunger, some
of the most courageous,
innovative, intelligent,
amazing people in the world.
And we have the
privilege-- and they're
the people who
experience hunger--
and we have the
privilege to join them.
And so rather than see them
as somebody we feel sorry for,
if you see the-- if you've
worked them the way I have,
people live in those
conditions, I mean,
you wouldn't believe what a
woman does when she has seven
children, her husband's
abandoned her,
she doesn't have any food.
How is she going to
get through the day?
You think about that.
You've got a daughter.
>>LISA: For a minute.
Yes.
>>TWIST: You just
think about that.
I've sat with women in Ethiopia
after every single child
that they had died in famine and
they were motherless-- sorry.
>>LISA: Childless.
>>TWIST: Childless mothers.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>TWIST: And seeing what
that does to a woman
to lose her own child and
not be able to feed her
even if she has a baby at her
breast and there's no more milk
because she hasn't had
water in two weeks.
You know?
These are courageous people.
They may not know
how to read, they
may be uneducated or illiterate,
but they're not unintelligent.
And I can even tell
you, those same women
that I sat with in
Ethiopia and mourned
over the deaths
of their children
when they described each
excruciating death-- now,
out of the seven that I sat
with for five days and five
nights, four of
them-- who had never
even knew how to read or write,
and they were in their late 40s
when this famine took place
in Ethiopia back in 1984,
1985-- four of them have gone
all the way through school,
three of them have
PhD's and one of them
is a lawyer and running
the largest female law
firm in Ethiopia.
>>LISA: We actually have picture
of some of these experiences
that you've been on.
And I want to also
close the loop on what
we were talking about
about the finances.
But to give people a
visual of where you've been
and where your journeys have
taken you and the impact
that you've made
around the globe
is really-- it's worth sharing.
This particular
picture is of a school.
Did you help create this school?
>>TWIST: Well, that's actually
not a school we created,
but we created a literacy
program in that school
specifically for girls.
Because in much of Asia
and sub-Saharan Africa,
girls aren't valued and they
don't get to go to school.
And an educated girl changes
the picture dramatically.
They have fewer children, they
don't get married so early,
they say in Africa,
if you educate
a man you educate one person, if
you educate a girl or a woman,
you educate a nation.
And it's really, really true.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>TWIST: So that is a scene
from a school where we opened up
the whole possibility
of educating girls
and ran a literacy clinic
focused on boys and girls.
>>LISA: So that really does
also impact the world hunger
and the Hunger Project as well.
>>TWIST: Yes.
Yes.
Absolutely.
>>LISA: And this is with you
and President Bill Clinton.
>>TWIST: And that's Joan
Holmes who was for many years
the president of the Hunger
Project and my great mentor
and teacher.
And that's in Washington
when we gave the Africa
Prize for leadership-- a
prize the Hunger Project gives
each year-- to Nelson
Mandela for his great work.
President Clinton was president
at that time, so he came.
>>LISA: OK.
He came for our party.
>>LISA: Dignitaries
to now children in--
>>TWIST: That's in Senegal.
I worked very much
in the Sahel Desert
where there's all kinds of
people living where there's not
a blade of grass and where you
don't think there's any water.
But we discovered, the
women actually discovered,
that if they dug
deep enough there
was an underground lake
under all of 17 villages.
75,000 people were
saved from starvation.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>TWIST: Because
women's intuition
knew that there
was a well there.
And that's a scene
from the village
in that region of the Sahel.
>>LISA: Oh, my goodness.
Look at how happy you are.
You just--
>>TWIST: I'm so happy.
>>LISA: You glow.
Look at-- I mean, this is a
picture of a woman on purpose.
That's beautiful.
And--
>>TWIST: That's in India at
Mother Teresa's orphanage
in Calcutta.
Mother Teresa was
another teacher for me.
I can't believe I even got
a chance to kiss her hand.
But I really learned so
much from Mother Teresa.
She actually was a great
fundraiser, by the way.
And so I had a lot of work I
did in India for the Hunger
Project, gave me access, and
kind of the great privilege
of working with her and
really learning from her
and knowing her before
she passed away.
So that's in one
of her orphanages.
>>LISA: And there she is.
>>TWIST: There she is.
She's signing her
business card which
has got the Saint Francis
of Assisi prayer on it.
And then she signs it M.Teresa.
>>LISA: M. Short for mother.
>>TWIST: Yeah.
Short for mother.
>>LISA: M period earth.
That's-- wow.
She's-- I want to hear a little
bit more about her fundraising
and how she does it.
And where's this?
>>TWIST: That's in Bangladesh.
Bangladesh is one of my--
I love all these places,
I love Bangladesh.
Bangladesh has 140 million
people living in a land mass
the size of Iowa.
So this is one of the
most sparse rural areas
in Bangladesh.
But you can see, even
there, they build the houses
right next to each
other because it's
a very densely populated
kind of mindset.
>>LISA: But look at how
they've build the houses.
Those are made out of the
local environment, of course,
and provide shelter and
they're very, very sturdy.
They look very sturdy.
>>TWIST: Yeah.
Yeah.
It's a wonderful,
wonderful country.
And Bangladeshi people, their
primary art form is poetry.
And they are
extraordinary poets.
You don't think of Bangladesh
as a country of poets,
but I want to say
that so people know.
Going to Bangladesh
is an experience
of interacting with profound--
a profound love for poetry.
>>LISA: Did you
get to experience
some of the readings?
>>TWIST: Oh, yeah.
Absolutely.
>>LISA: What are they about?
>>TWIST: Very much about their
own love for life and love
for-- they have constant
tsunamis and floods
and they rebuild their houses
every 10 minutes because they
get flooded, it's in
a low land, and it's
one of the countries that
will absolutely disappear
with global warming
if the oceans rise.
And so there is a resilience
in the Bangladeshi people
that they-- that
they sing about.
They also do
fantastic embroidery.
And that's where the
Grameen Bank was born.
The microcredit
movement really--
>>LISA: Really?
>>TWIST: -- you could say
was born in many places,
but Muhammad Yunus, who
won the Nobel Prize, Dr.
Muhammad Yunus who started the
Grameen Bank the same year we
started the Hunger
Project-- 1977.
And we worked very
closely with him.
And that's a bank
that is owned by women
and lends primarily to
women, $25, $50, $75.
It's the beginning of
the microcredit movement.
>>LISA: That's an
amazing movement as well.
And then this is the women
you were speaking of.
>>TWIST: That's in Ghana.
That's not in Ethiopia.
That's in Ghana.
And those women are part of
also Women's World Banking which
is another microcredit
movement that--
>>LISA: Wow.
>>TWIST: --was founded
by many different people,
but one of the founders
is Esther Ocloo in Ghana.
And that's at her
center where these
are women who are
learning about banking
and learning about how to
navigate the world of money.
And just a wonderful place.
>>LISA: So we were
talking about that,
and I had asked you about
how the fundraising and how
you teach people that are in--
even in countries that don't
have access to a lot of
money, you teach them
how to raise funds
amongst themselves.
How do you do that?
>>TWIST: Well, I
just must say that we
think of fundraising as
haves giving to have nots.
And I try to do everything
I can to sort break up
our thinking about that.
Because in the way
I see it, this world
of sufficiency and
enough, which is really
how I see the world, really
thanks to Buckminster
Fuller-- and I could
tell you about that, too.
I see that everybody's a have.
There aren't any have nots.
So in a place like-- you
could say Ghana or Ethiopia--
the women that I was
referring to earlier,
they have tremendous assets.
Now, the assets
aren't financial.
We think of assets
as financial, but no.
They know the local language,
they understand dry farming,
they know when their
cattle are thirsty by just
looking at the
color of their fur.
They are so incredibly wise
and you cannot actually work
on ending hunger in Ethiopia
without the assets that they
bring to the table.
So in the example of
the women in Ethiopia
who survived the famine
and their children did not,
I had that incredible
encounter with them
and then, just a few days
later, I had to go to New York
to give a "Soul of Money"
talk to an investment
club of extremely wealthy
women in New York City.
And there were seven of them.
Interesting, seven and seven.
And so I was just filled
with being so inspired
about these women
in Ethiopia so I
couldn't talk about
anything but them.
>>LISA: Right.
>>TWIST: So I did.
And what happened to the
seven wealthy, kind of all
about shopping and lunch and--
kind of women in New York,
their husbands were
mega wealthy and they
were looking for
meaning, and that's
why they brought me in to talk
about the "Soul of Money" book.
I told them about these
women in Ethiopia.
And what we ended
up doing was seeing
that we needed to
partner in a sisterhood
as co-equal partners.
The women in New York having
assets of money, influence,
leisure time, and the
capacity to travel.
The women in Ethiopia
having the local language,
a fierce commitment
to eradicating hunger
in their country, a fierce
commitment to getting educated,
a fierce commitment to keeping
their tribal ways intact.
And if we put those assets
and these assets together,
something miraculous would
happen for both parties.
And it did.
And in a co-equal partnership,
rather than haves giving
to have nots, haves and
haves-- not H-A-L-V-E-S,
but H-A-V-E-S-- coming
together with their assets,
combining for a partnership
that creating miracles in all
of those lives, in my own
life, and in Ethiopia itself,
and in the culture of the New
York wealthy women in which
they were engaged.
>>LISA: So you're
really showing people,
if they take the
mission and the passion
and they marry that together
with their resources
and combined with the
resources of the people
that their mission and
passion are driven towards,
it can come together in an
incredibly harmonious way.
>>TWIST: Well, yeah.
>>LISA: And that's what you do.
>>TWIST: I just don't
see anyone as poor.
I think you maybe showed
a clip about this.
>>LISA: I want to show that.
>>TWIST: But I can-- I just
don't-- I just have never,
really since I kind of got
this insight of sufficiency,
I see only
sufficiency in people.
I see their beauty,
their greatness.
And I don't think we should--
I don't think we can really
legitimately call anyone
poor because everyone's
a whole and complete
person living
in a certain kind
of circumstance.
Circumstances are
poor, but not them.
>>LISA: Right.
And the circumstances are
the ones that are exploited.
>>TWIST: Yes.
>>LISA: I see exactly
what you're talking about.
I want to actually
show that clip.
This is from one of
the "Soul of Money"
workshops that you've given.
And it's a whole different
concept, or a reframe,
on the word poor.
Let's see that clip.
>>TWIST: Thanks.
[BEGIN VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>Where my teachings about
money have come from,
they have come from an
unusual or unexpected source.
My learnings, my teachings about
money and about many things
have come from people
that I used to call poor.
And I say this pretty much every
time I speak, so some of you've
heard this before, but
it's really important
for me let you know
that much of what I know
has come from people
that I used to call poor,
that I would never
call poor again.
Because I now know them.
I've worked with people that I
used to call poor, side by side
in Ethiopia after the
famine in 1984, 1985.
Side by side with people in
Bangladesh after a monsoon
completely destroyed their
home and they rebuilt it.
Side by side with
people in India
who have taken the
life of their baby girl
because they were so
desperately praying for a boy
and know that girls
actually in that culture,
at least at that
time, don't matter.
I've worked with
people in urban ghettos
who really thought violence
was the answer to pretty
much anything and everything.
So I'm a person who's had
a lot of exposure to people
that I used to
actually label poor
and I would never
say that about them
again, because I know that
when you collapse people's
financial circumstances
with who they are,
you actually demean
them and those of us
who would collapse
that and make them
be their financial
circumstances.
Because people are not their
financial circumstances.
People are whole
and complete people,
living in the ebb and flow
of financial circumstances,
the ebb and flow of resources.
So people are not poor.
No one is.
Everyone has gifts,
everyone has treasures,
everyone is whole and complete.
And I have seen people in
those kinds of circumstances
be the most resilient, most
intelligent, most amazing, most
innovative, most
outrageously creative people
that I've ever seen.
In fact, those kind
of circumstances
sometimes fostered
really true genius.
And people living in
those circumstances
often exhibit more courage
to live through a day
than you and I are going
to need in our lifetime,
or ever call upon
in our lifetime.
So to call them poor
is so inaccurate.
And that kind of a
label-- actually when
you call people something,
you label people something,
they actually start buying
it themselves often.
And so I've learned that people
are whole and complete living
in resource poor
circumstances and that it's
fair and valid to call
their circumstances poor,
but not them.
[END VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>LISA: So thank you for
that because it really
reframes a lot of things.
And you've taken that mission
on through all of your work,
haven't you?
>>TWIST: Well, I also
learned, from Mother Teresa
actually, that it doesn't really
work also to call people rich.
Because even though
we all want to be,
it makes people
actually think that they
are their financial
circumstances,
they are their trust fund,
they are their bank account,
they are their stock options,
they are their private plane
or they are their
gated community.
>>LISA: Where we're
all much more.
Much, much more.
>>TWIST: And then if
anything threatens that,
then they feel like their own--
>>LISA: Themselves.
>>TWIST: --that they
are being attacked.
So it's a disservice
to people to label them
in any way like that.
We're all whole and complete
people doing the best we can
in whatever circumstances
we've been given.
>>LISA: Right.
Right.
That even goes on to
defining yourself as the work
that you do.
We are our jobs.
We aren't because it all
threatens our survival
if we're not.
And, yeah, that's--
>>TWIST: So it's good
to just disaggregate
that or deconstruct that a
little bit from time to time.
>>LISA: Well, absolutely.
For people, you have served
as such an amazing example.
Not everyone could sit
there and say, well,
what I learned from
Mother Teresa was--
>>TWIST: Well, that was
a pretty-- a high point
in my life, I would say.
>>LISA: I would say so.
>>TWIST: I can't
believe I even knew her.
But, wow.
>>LISA: Yeah.
And to have worked with her.
And all that you have done.
I mean, through the video
and through the symposiums,
and the travels and
the journeys that you
take with the indigenous
people, and the stories
that you bring back.
I mean, you are our modern
day young female shaman.
But I mean, it's wonderful.
>>TWIST: You called me young.
I love that.
>>LISA: Well, it shows us how
we can, each one of us, make
a difference through
your empowerment,
through your
inspiration, and what
you've shown that you
do in individual pockets
through your mindset.
Really, it's about
where you start here.
And so there's a way,
I think, that anyone
watching this can take
home what they've learned
and make one small difference
or one large difference
in their life.
And if everyone watching
makes a difference
and then that person inspires
someone else to do the same
and so on and so on, you've
created that ripple effect
which is, I think, why
you're on this planet.
>>TWIST: Oh, thanks.
Well, there's so many-- it just
makes life so much more fun,
actually.
And I really don't want to
minimize that because people
really are looking for
meaning and looking
for finding a connection
of their soul.
And there is so much
wonderful work to be done.
And if you go on a website
like Green America,
they tell you all
about things you
can do with social justice and--
>>LISA: It's available.
Yeah.
The information is out there.
>>TWIST: The pathways
are right there.
>>LISA: Absolutely.
>>TWIST: And I think
the thing to do
is just put your hand on your
heart and see what's my role.
I think everyone
has a role to play.
It's not a big role
or a small role.
>>LISA: What calls to you.
>>TWIST: It's just your role--
>>LISA: Right.
>>TWIST: --and it's unique.
And if you play it,
your life will flourish
and you'll make a difference.
>>LISA: You're making
a big difference
with the Four Years Go
project which is a lot of fun.
And you've brought technology
and a whole media campaign
into-- what exactly
is that Four Years Go?
>>TWIST: Well, Four Years
Go is a giant conversation.
It's a media kind
of campaign and it's
a kind of commitment
campaign, and in many ways
it's naming this
time in history.
So I like to say, people
who lived during the roaring
'20s looked like they were
having a really good time.
But they didn't really know,
oh, we're in the Roaring '20s.
They didn't call it the
roaring '20s until afterwards.
We are now so evolved
as a human species
and so awake really
now, that we are
aware that we are
living in a time
when it's really the time of
a big, gigantic seismic shift.
>>LISA: Shift.
Yes.
>>TWIST: And we're-- the Four
Years Go campaign really names
2011, 2012, 2013 and 2014--
>>LISA: Those are
the four years.
>>TWIST: --as the pivotal four
years when we're shifting from
a trajectory-- moving the human
family towards a trajectory
of dangerous, inhospitable,
unsustainable, dark,
violent future-- which you
can feel is kind of where
we're heading-- to shifting
towards a hospitable,
sustainable, peaceful--
>>LISA: Compassionate.
>>TWIST: --nonviolent,
nourishing future.
And the shift is taking
place in these four years
and we didn't make it happen
in these four years, of course.
But I say the tide
has already turned.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>TWIST: I mean, this
program is part of it.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>TWIST: And Gaiam is part
of it and you're part of it
and the people watching
this and the people who
aren't watching
this are part of it.
>>LISA: Yes.
True.
>>TWIST: And we want them to
have the opportunity to own it,
to author it, to be part of
it so that we can accelerate
that shift and make
sure it happens in time.
In other words,
there'll be a time
when some things
will be irreversible,
particularly with
the environment.
So this shift that
is taking place,
to have it really
shift four years then
go in this new
direction-- and not
that everything will resolved
by the end 2014-- but let's
allow this shift to
happen in who we are.
>>LISA: So there's
a part-- this is
the clip that we're going to
show you of how people can
participate with your
organization, with who you are
and so forth.
It's a really fun,
motivating clip.
Let's take a look at
the Four Years Go clip.
>>TWIST: Yeah.
>>LISA: Yeah.
[BEGIN VIDEO PLAYBACK]
[END VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>LISA: If that doesn't motivate
you, I don't know what will.
I know, exactly.
It just gets you moving.
It makes you want to--
where did that come from?
What was the
inspiration behind that?
>>TWIST: Oh, well, we had
the most miraculous set
of circumstances that brought
us in communication with Widen
and Kennedy, the
largest independent ad
agency in the world, independent
ad agency network in the world.
Owned by Dan Widen
whose this amazing
guy who went to the rainforest
with us and partnered with us.
And he said, what
can I do to help
you change the dream
of the modern world?
Which is kind of a
cool thing to ask.
And move us towards--
>>LISA: Because he
can if anyone-- yes?
>>TWIST: --an environmentally
sustainable, spiritually
fulfilling and
socially just human
presence on this
planet, which is
the mission of the symposium.
How can we help
you move humanity
in that direction faster?
And we said, well, let's
partner and create something.
And we created this video
together and the whole idea
of really naming these four
years as the years when
we can really turn the tide.
And so without them, I don't
know what we would have done.
But they're so good and they
made that video with us.
We did it together.
And so out of that has
come a film contest
about the possible futures
and all kinds of people
are using Four Years Go
as a template for planning
and there's more than
1,000 organizations that
have signed on all kinds
of people and companies
have changed their trajectory.
It's just awesome.
And you can see the
world is different.
It's not that Four
Years Go is causing it.
It's naming it and giving
people permission--
>>LISA: Oh, yes.
>>TWIST: --to really
make the change.
>>LISA: But it takes
something to ignite the spark
and to motivate us and
to give us an action plan
and to really put
it into reality.
And, I mean, if
there is anything
that you have done
today, is that for us.
You've put it into
reality with your stories,
with your inspiration, with your
heart, with who you are being.
And I just thank you
so much for everything.
And if people at home could
understand that one person can
make a difference,
that really is you.
So thank you so
much for everything.
>>TWIST: Oh, thank you, Lisa.
Thank you.
>>LISA: For your contribution
to this planet and--
>>TWIST: My--
>>LISA: --for everything
that you said.
>>TWIST: --delight,
as you can tell.
My joy, my honor, my privilege.
Thank you.
>>LISA: Thank you so much.
All right.
Are you ready?
High five.
We had to do that.
It just makes it-- thank
you for making it fun, too.
>>TWIST: Yeah.
Yeah.
It makes your life work
and your heart sing.
>>LISA: Yes.
Absolutely.
Thank you all so
much for listening.